Terraform Cloud Agent Hooks (#2154)
hashicorp/terraform-website: content/cloud-docs/agents/hooks.mdx

---

> page_title: Hooks - Terraform Cloud Agents - Terraform Cloud and Terraform Enterprise

Reviewer: Description helps with SEO! And it can show up as the snippet that google shows folks in search results. 

```suggestion
page_title: Hooks - Terraform Cloud Agents - Terraform Cloud and Terraform Enterprise
description: >-
  Hooks are custom programs that run at specific points during Terraform operations. 
```

---

# Hooks

Terraform Cloud Agents support executing custom programs, or hooks, during
strategic points of a Terraform run. These hooks allow operators to extend the

> functionality of Terraform runs.

Reviewer: Okay can we give folks an example or two at the beginning here to help them see what kinds of things they may want to use Hooks for?  

"Terraform Cloud Agents can run custom programs called hooks at specific stages of a Terraform run. This lets you add extend Terraform functionality. For example, you may want to create a hook to [explain] or to [explain]." 

Does that make sense? Nothing super major but just you know, to help people feel excited about waht they can do with this feature and see how valuable it is!

Also remember to call the reader "you" :-) We can assume that the folks reading this are operators and/or other people who are going to be doing these steps.

> Terraform Cloud Agents support the following hooks:

Reviewer: Could we add a heading here? I wonder if it's Hook Types or Hook Run Stages, or something - thoughts?  Also question - I know that we can't choose a custom name. Can we only have one hook of each type within an agent?

Author: I added a heading. Yep, only one hook per type.

- `pre-plan` - This hook executes before `terraform init` during a `plan`
operation.

- `post-plan` - This hook executes after `terraform plan` during a `plan`
operation regardless whether or not `terraform plan` successfully executed.

- `pre-apply` - This hook executes before `terraform init` during an `apply`
operation.

- `post-apply` - This hook executes after `terraform apply` during an `apply`
operation regardless whether or not `terraform apply` successfully executed.

> ## Limitations

Reviewer: I'm wondering if a different title is better here. It's just that a lot of them don't feel like limitations exactly, they feel like requirements. Thoughts on this?

Author: Updated it to `Hook Behavior`.

Please note the following when using hooks.

- If the hook exits with a non-zero exit code, the Terraform run will fail
immediately.
- The name of the hook is not customizable.
- The hook must be executable. That is, the hook must have execute permission.
- The hook has a 60 second timeout.
- Environment variables do not persist across hooks. For example, if a
`pre-plan` hook exports environment variables, they will not be available
during `terraform plan` nor will they be available during the `post-plan` hook.
Similarly, if `terraform plan` exports environment variables, they will not be
available during the `post-plan` hook.

## Configuration

Hooks are stored within the `hooks` subdirectory of the agent's data directory.
By default, that's `~/.tfc-agent/hooks`.

To enable a hook, create a file named `terraform-${HOOK}` where `${HOOK}` is
one of the hooks listed above. Then store that file within the `hooks`
subdirectory and make it executable. Once an agent is started and receives a
run, it will attempt to execute your hook at the specified point during the
Terraform run.

For example, a `pre-plan` hook uses an executable file named
`~/.tfc-agent/hooks/terraform-pre-plan`.

> ### Configuring hooks when running an Agent as a binary

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Running an Agent as a Binary
```

> When running the `tfc-agent` binary directly on a Linux instance, create the

Reviewer: Can we turn this and the below into numbered steps? That will make it easier for folks to follow!

`hooks` directory within the agent's data directory.

```sh
mkdir -p ~/.tfc-agent/hooks
```

Then create your hooks. Here, a `pre-plan` hook is being created.

```sh
cat <<EOF > ~/.tfc-agent/hooks/terraform-pre-plan
#!/bin/bash
echo "Example pre-plan hook."
EOF
```

Don't forget to make the hooks executable!

```sh
chmod +x ~/.tfc-agent/hooks/terraform-pre-plan
```

Finally, start the agent.

```sh
tfc-agent
```

> That's it! As the agent executes Terraform runs it will attempt to execute

Reviewer: I like this friendly tone! But, we should stay away from using exclamation points in our docs and things that make it seem like setup is easy/that we think it's easy. If a user has some type of error, we don't want to make them feel bad with our enthusiasm. :-) Also, I try to use different language for things like "execute" (where it makes sense!) because our style guide advises us to steer away from violent language. Sometimes it can be unavoidable (execute is a common term in programming and things are literally called "executables"), but in a lot of places here I think "run" could be a good substitute - what do you think about that?

Also you said "attempt to create your enabled hooks." Three things:
- Are there any like common failure modes or gotchas that would make this not work? Attempt made me nervous haha. If not we should sya "Terraform will run your enabled hooks." 
- If possible, can we say "Terraform will run your enabled hooks" - i don't want to make users feel unsure that it will work properly!
- when you say "enabled" - is there something else folks have to do to enable them? OR is it just that like if there's an executable run task in the folder, it's getting added? If the l latter is the case, I wonder if it makes more sense to say "existing".

Author: Updated!

your enabled hooks.

> ### Configuring hooks when running an Agent using Docker 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Running an Agent with Docker 
```

When running `tfc-agent` using Docker, you need to build a new Docker image
containing your hooks.

> First, create a new directory and change into it. This limits the Docker

Reviewer: Again - can we make these into numbered steps?

build context to this new directory.

```sh
mkdir hooks-docker-example
cd hooks-docker-example
```

Then, create a `hooks` directory to hold your hooks.

```sh
mkdir hooks
```

> Next, create your hooks. Here, a `pre-plan` hook is being created.

Reviewer: For things like this, let's say "The following example creates a `pre-plan` hook.

```sh
cat <<EOF > hooks/terraform-pre-plan
#!/bin/bash
echo "Example pre-plan hook."
EOF
```

Don't forget to make the hooks executable!

```sh
chmod +x hooks/terraform-pre-plan
```

Build a new `hashicorp/tfc-agent` Docker image using this `Dockerfile`.

```
FROM hashicorp/tfc-agent:latest
RUN mkdir /home/tfc-agent/.tfc-agent
ADD --chown=tfc-agent:tfc-agent hooks /home/tfc-agent/.tfc-agent/hooks
```

Start the agent using your newly built Docker image.

```sh
docker run -e TFC_AGENT_TOKEN=your-token -e TFC_AGENT_NAME=your-agent-name \
  hashicorp/tfc-agent:your-tag
```

> That's it! As the agent executes Terraform runs it will attempt to execute your

Reviewer: Same as above!

  during Terraform runs.
---

# Hooks

Terraform Cloud Agents support running custom programs, or hooks, during
strategic points of a Terraform run. These hooks allow you to extend the
functionality of Terraform runs. For example, you may create a hook to
dynamically download software required by the Terraform run or send an HTTP
request to a system to kick off an external workflow.

## Supported Hooks

The following hooks are supported:

- `pre-plan` - The hook runs before `terraform init` during a `plan` operation.

- `post-plan` - This hook runs after `terraform plan` during a `plan`
operation regardless whether or not `terraform plan` completed successfully.

- `pre-apply` - The hook runs before `terraform init` during an `apply`
operation.

- `post-apply` - This hook runs after `terraform apply` during an `apply`
operation regardless whether or not `terraform apply` completed successfully.

## Hook Behavior 

Please note the following behavior when using hooks:

- If a hook exits with a non-zero exit code, the Terraform run will fail
immediately.
- The standard output and standard error from the hook will be printed
alongside the Terraform run output.

> - The name of each hook is not customizable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-  The hook name must match one of the [supported types](#supported-types). You cannot customize or change these names. Because of this, there can only be one hook of each type configured for each agent. For example, you could create a `pre-plan` and `pre-apply` hook, but you cannot create two `pre-plan` hooks.
```

> - Hooks must be executable. That is, each hook must have execute permission.

Reviewer: Each Hook must have execute permission (for the organization? for the workspace?) or is this literally about making it executable in general? Just wondering if people need to like set permissions somewhere or something.

Author: Yep, they need to make sure the file has the execute permission set on it.

> - Each hook has a 60 second timeout.

Reviewer: If a hook times out, does it stop the run? or will the run continue but the hook just won't finish.

Author: It will stop the run. Updated!

- There can only be one of each hook configured on an agent. That is, you can
have both a `pre-plan` and `pre-apply` hook but you cannot have two `pre-plan`

> hooks.

Reviewer: Remove - i combined it with the one above :-)

- Environment variables do not persist across hooks. For example, if a
`pre-plan` hook exports environment variables, they will not be available

> during `terraform plan` nor will they be available during the `post-plan` hook.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
during `terraform plan` or during the `post-plan` hook.
```

Similarly, if `terraform plan` exports environment variables, they will not be
available during the `post-plan` hook.

## Configuration

Hooks are stored within the `hooks` subdirectory of the agent's data directory.
By default, that's `~/.tfc-agent/hooks`.

To configure a hook, create a file named `terraform-${HOOK}` where `${HOOK}`
is one of the hooks listed above. Then store that file within the `hooks`
subdirectory and make it executable. The agent will run your configured hooks
as it processes Terraform runs.

For example, a `pre-plan` hook is an executable file named
`~/.tfc-agent/hooks/terraform-pre-plan`. When this hook is configured, an agent
will run this hook before `terraform init` during a `plan` operation.

### Running an Agent as a Binary

> Here's how you can configure hooks when running the `tfc-agent` binary
> directly on a Linux instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To configure hooks when running the `tfc-agent` binary directly on a Linux instance:
```

1. Create the `hooks` directory within the agent's data directory.

  ```sh

>   mkdir -p ~/.tfc-agent/hooks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  $ mkdir -p ~/.tfc-agent/hooks
```

  ```

> 1. Create your hooks. The following example creates a `pre-plan` hook.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create one or more hooks. The following example creates a `pre-plan` hook that prints a message during `terraform init`.
```

  ```sh
  cat <<EOF > ~/.tfc-agent/hooks/terraform-pre-plan
  #!/bin/bash
  echo "Example pre-plan hook."
  EOF
  ```

1. Make the hooks executable.

  ```sh

>   chmod +x ~/.tfc-agent/hooks/terraform-pre-plan

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  $ chmod +x ~/.tfc-agent/hooks/terraform-pre-plan
```

  ```

1. Start the agent.

  ```sh

>   tfc-agent

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  $ tfc-agent
```

  ```

> 1. As the agent processes Terraform runs, it will run the hooks you've
> configured above.

Reviewer: Also one thing that occurred to me is....do you think it could be helpful for users to see an example of what the output might look like? I know we say it prints "with the Terraform" stuff, but like where would they see it? Feel free to push back. but just thinking out loud. 

```suggestion
The agent will now trigger configured hooks at the appropriate points during Terraform runs.
```

### Running an Agent with Docker 

> Configuring hooks when running `tfc-agent` using Docker requires you to build
> a new Docker image containing your hooks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When running `tfc-agent` using Docker, you must build a new Docker image containing the hooks. To configure hooks:
```

> 1. Create a new directory and change into it. This limits the Docker build

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create a new directory and navigate into it. This limits the Docker build
```

context to this new directory.

>   ```sh
>   mkdir hooks-docker-example
>   cd hooks-docker-example
>   ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ```sh
   $ mkdir hooks-docker-example
   $ cd hooks-docker-example
  ```
```

Reviewer: This is the format they use on Learn for terminal commands and I want to start adopting it in docs!

Author: Hmmm. I'm gonna avoid this for now because when the `$` characters are there, the copy button only copies the first line.

For example, given this:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/24284972/155822144-3c859f69-5383-4d3a-a0a7-54ecbcf39da9.png)

Clicking the copy button would only copy this to your clipboard:

```
mkdir hooks-docker-example
```

> 1. Create a `hooks` directory to hold your hooks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create a `hooks` directory.
```

Reviewer: Also should they change into this directory?

Author: Nope!

  ```sh

>   mkdir hooks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  $ mkdir hooks
```

  ```

> 1. Create your hooks. The following example creates a `pre-plan` hook.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create one or more hooks. The following example creates a `pre-plan` hook that prints a message during `terraform init`.
```

  ```sh

>   cat <<EOF > hooks/terraform-pre-plan

Reviewer: can you add the $ in appropriate spots (lol I'm not 100% sure if any of this is output...*sigh* I need to get better at command line)

Author: I touched on this in this comment: https://github.com/hashicorp/terraform-website/pull/2154#discussion_r815242329

We can revisit adding `$` at a later time though. I'd rather keep better copy functionality rather than add the `$`.

For the commands on this page, they are meant to be copied in their entirety. There's no output from commands being shown, only the command itself to run.

  #!/bin/bash
  echo "Example pre-plan hook."
  EOF
  ```

1. Make the hooks executable.

  ```sh

>   chmod +x hooks/terraform-pre-plan

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  $ chmod +x hooks/terraform-pre-plan
```

  ```

> 1. Create a `Dockerfile` with the following content.

Reviewer: Is it obvious which folder they should be in here? Just asking

Author: Yep. They shouldn't have moved anywhere unless told.

  ```
  FROM hashicorp/tfc-agent:latest
  RUN mkdir /home/tfc-agent/.tfc-agent
  ADD --chown=tfc-agent:tfc-agent hooks /home/tfc-agent/.tfc-agent/hooks
  ```

> 1. Build a new `hashicorp/tfc-agent` Docker image using the newly created
> `Dockerfile`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Build a new `hashicorp/tfc-agent` Docker image using the hooks `Dockerfile`.
```

  ```

>   docker build -t hashicorp/tfc-agent:your-tag .

Reviewer: is your-tag the file name?

```suggestion
  $ docker build -t hashicorp/tfc-agent:your-tag .
```

  ```

> 1. Start the agent using your newly built Docker image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Start the agent using the Docker image.
```

  ```sh
  docker run -e TFC_AGENT_TOKEN=your-token -e TFC_AGENT_NAME=your-agent-name \
    hashicorp/tfc-agent:your-tag
  ```

> 1. As the agent processes Terraform runs, it will run the hooks you've
> configured above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The agent will now trigger configured hooks at the appropriate points during Terraform runs.
```
